Documenting the usage of return type for programmatic navigation (#1480)
vaadin/docs: articles/routing/navigation.asciidoc

           ui.navigate("company"))
);
----

[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V23.2"]
=== Interacting directly with the target view

The [methodname]`navigate()` method where you give the target view class as a parameter returns the actual target view as [classname]`Optional`.
This allows you to further configure the new view with its Java API. 

The return value may be empty if the target view is not immediately available for some reason.
This may happen, for example, because of security constraints or if the navigation was canceled or postponed in a <<lifecycle#, navigation lifecycle events>>.

*Example*: Creating an edit button that navigates to a separate view and assigns the DTO to the target view with its Java API:

[source,java]
----
new Button("Edit " + user.getName(), event -> {
    ui.navigate(UserEditor.class)
            .ifPresent(editor -> editor.editUser(user));
})
----

Note that, with this code, Vaadin does not have the data to maintain a deep link to edit the same entity.
For the active user of the application, a view to edit the selected entity is opened, but they cannot share a direct link to edit the same entity with their colleague.

> If deep linking is required, the target view must <<updating-url-parameters#,maintain enough details about the UI state in the URL>> or developer must use Route Parameters to pass the data instead of the direct Java API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If deep linking is required, the target view must <<updating-url-parameters#,maintain enough details about the UI state in the URL>>, or the developer must use RouteParameters to pass the data, instead of the direct Java API.
```

=== Passing Data using Route Parameters

> If your target view implements HasRouteParameters, you can submit trivial data to the target view as RouteParameters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your target view implements [interfacename]`HasRouteParameters`, you can submit trivial data to the target view as [classname]`RouteParameters`. 
```

Compared to directly interacting with the target views Java API, this method automatically maintains the URL for deep linking. 

> However, you can't pass more complex objects as route parameters as such and you always need to consider data safety parameters that end up to URLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you cannot pass more complex objects as route parameters as such, and you always need to consider data safety parameters that end up in URLs.
```

You should primarily use [methodname]`UI.navigate(Class<? extends Component> navigationTarget)` or [methodname]`navigate(Class<? extends C> navigationTarget, RouteParameters parameters)` methods, where you pass the [classname]`Class` of the target view as a parameter.
Compared to [classname]`String` versions, this avoids having to generate the route string manually.

In the browser, navigate methods triggers a location update and the addition of a new history state entry, but does not issue a full page reload.

*Example*: Navigation to the `company` route target when clicking a button:

[source,java]
----
NativeButton button = new NativeButton(
        "Navigate to company");
button.addClickListener(e ->
     button.getUI().ifPresent(ui ->
           ui.navigate("company"))
);
----

*Example*: Navigation to the `user/123/edit` route target when clicking a button:

[source,java]
----
NativeButton editButton = new NativeButton(
        "Edit user details");
editButton.addClickListener(e ->
        editButton.getUI().ifPresent(ui -> ui.navigate(
                UserProfileEdit.class,
                new RouteParameters("userID", "123")))
);
----

> [role="since:react-dom@v23.2"]

Reviewer 2: Define the Maven artifact ID (we are not interested in the version of the `react-dom` npm dependency), and use an uppercase `V` since that will appear as is in the production site (and we use that instead of lowercase `v`).

```suggestion
[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V23.2"]
```

Author: Eh. I was wondering that that react-dom ment, just copy-pasting as I have no idea what this docs site does 😂 Still don't understand the version. Is that required to be a full maven version or something else? What is production site? (for further reference, I assume your suggestion is correct).

=== Configuring the target view

The navigate methods where you give the target view class as a parameter returns the actual target view as [classname]`Optional`. This allows you to further configure the new view with native Java API. 

> The optional may be empty if the target view is not immediately available for some reason. This may happen for example because of security constraints or if the navigation was cancelled or posponed in navigation lifecycle events TODO link.

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand the last part of this paragraph with the `TODO link` mention.

```suggestion
The optional may be empty if the target view is not immediately available for some reason.
This may happen, for example, because of security constraints or if the navigation was cancelled or postponed in navigation lifecycle events `TODO` link.
```

Author: I'll add a link to different part of docs there, forgot to do that there.

= Navigating Between Routes

> Switching between routes/views can be initiated in two ways: programmatically using [methodname]`UI.navigate()` methods or using links. The navigate method is more agile for Java programmer, as the view change can be issued from anywhere in you code and you can interact with the target view. Using links on the other hand is the native web way of moving from view to another, allowing you for example to share the direct link to a specific view with your colleague and they work even if session has expired.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Switching between routes/views can be initiated in two ways: programmatically using [methodname]`UI.navigate()` methods or using links.
The navigate method is more agile for a Java programmer, as the view change can be issued from anywhere in your code and you can interact with the target view.
Using links, on the other hand, is the native web way of moving from one view to another, allowing you for example to share the direct link to a specific view with your colleague and they work even if the session has expired.
```

> Switching between routes/views can be initiated in two ways: programmatically using [methodname]`UI.navigate()` methods or using links. The navigate method is more agile for Java programmer, as the view change can be issued from anywhere in you code and you can interact with the target view. Using links on the other hand is the native web way of moving from view to another, allowing you for example to share the direct link to a specific view with your colleague and they work even if session has expired.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Switching between routes/views can be initiated in two ways: programmatically using [methodname]`UI.navigate()` methods or using links.
The navigate method is more agile for a Java programmer, as the view change can be issued from anywhere in your code and you can interact with the target view.
Using links, on the other hand, is the native web way of moving from one view to another, allowing you for example to share the direct link to a specific view with your colleague and they work even if the session has expired.
```

The navigate method is more agile for a Java programmer, as the view change can be issued from anywhere in your code and you can interact with the target view.
Using links, on the other hand, is the native web way of moving from one view to another, allowing you for example to share the direct link to a specific view with your colleague and they work even if the session has expired.

== Server-Side Navigation

> You can trigger navigation from the server side code using various [methodname]`UI.navigate()` methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can trigger navigation from the server-side code using various [methodname]`UI.navigate()` methods.
```

You should primarily use [methodname]`UI.navigate(Class<? extends Component> navigationTarget)` or [methodname]`navigate(Class<? extends C> navigationTarget, RouteParameters parameters)` methods, where you pass the [classname]`Class` of the target view as a parameter.
Compared to [classname]`String` versions, this avoids having to generate the route string manually.

> In the browser, navigate methods triggers a location update and the addition of a new history state entry, but does not issue a full page reload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the browser, the [methodname]`navigate()` method triggers a location update and the addition of a new history state entry, but does not issue a full page reload.
```

[source,java]
----

> NativeButton button = new NativeButton(
>         "Navigate to company");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Button button = new Button("Navigate to company");
```

Author: Was about to make other improvement in an other commit, but suits me...

> NativeButton button = new NativeButton(
>         "Navigate to company");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Button button = new Button("Navigate to company");
```

button.addClickListener(e ->
     button.getUI().ifPresent(ui ->
           ui.navigate("company"))
);
----

> *Example*: Navigation to the `user/123/edit` route target when clicking a button:

Reviewer 3: Would the example be clearer if we use a simpler URL? How about `user-view/id1234`? If we do that, then also instead of using `UserProfileEdit.class`, we can use the more obvious `UserView.class`.

Author: Yes, I had a note about this part as well. Getting to advanced example, when explaining the basics. But I'd favour doing this (and others) change separately, as this patch is related to new functionality and supporting areas.

> *Example*: Navigation to the `user/123/edit` route target when clicking a button:

Reviewer 3: Would the example be clearer if we use a simpler URL? How about `user-view/id1234`? If we do that, then also instead of using `UserProfileEdit.class`, we can use the more obvious `UserView.class`.

[source,java]
----

> NativeButton editButton = new NativeButton(
>         "Edit user details");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Button editButton = new Button("Edit user details");
```

> NativeButton editButton = new NativeButton(
>         "Edit user details");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Button editButton = new Button("Edit user details");
```

editButton.addClickListener(e ->
        editButton.getUI().ifPresent(ui -> ui.navigate(
                UserProfileEdit.class,
                new RouteParameters("userID", "123")))
);
----

[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V23.2"]
=== Configuring the target view

> The navigate methods where you give the target view class as a parameter returns the actual target view as [classname]`Optional`. This allows you to further configure the new view with its Java API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [methodname]`navigate()` method where you give the target view class as a parameter returns the actual target view as [classname]`Optional`.
This allows you to further configure the new view with its Java API. 
```

> The navigate methods where you give the target view class as a parameter returns the actual target view as [classname]`Optional`. This allows you to further configure the new view with native Java API. 

Reviewer 3: > new view with native Java API
As a reader, I'm not sure what "native" is supposed to mean here.

> The navigate methods where you give the target view class as a parameter returns the actual target view as [classname]`Optional`. This allows you to further configure the new view with native Java API. 

Reviewer 3: > new view with native Java API
As a reader, I'm not sure what "native" is supposed to mean here.

The return value may be empty if the target view is not immediately available for some reason.

> This may happen, for example, because of security constraints or if the navigation was cancelled or postponed in <<lifecycle#, navigation lifecycle events>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This may happen, for example, because of security constraints or if the navigation was canceled or postponed in a <<lifecycle#, navigation lifecycle events>>.
```

> This may happen, for example, because of security constraints or if the navigation was cancelled or postponed in <<lifecycle#, navigation lifecycle events>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This may happen, for example, because of security constraints or if the navigation was canceled or postponed in a <<lifecycle#, navigation lifecycle events>>.
```

*Example*: Creating an edit button that navigates to a separate view and assigns the DTO to the target view with its native Java API:

[source,java]
----
new Button("Edit " + user.getName(), event -> {
    ui.navigate(UserEditor.class)
            .ifPresent(editor -> editor.editUser(user));
})
----

> Note, that with the above code Vaadin don't have the data to maintain deep link to edit the very same user. 
> In many use cases this is fine, but if you expect to share links to the target view, the target view must maintain enough details in the URL and add de-serialise the parameters, as described in <<route-parameters#, Route Parameters>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, with this code, Vaadin does not have the data to maintain a deep link to edit the very same user. 
In many use cases, this is fine, but if you expect to share links to the target view, the target view must maintain enough details in the URL and deserialize the parameters, as described in <<route-parameters#, Route Parameters>>.
```

*Example*: Navigation to the `company` route target when clicking a button:

[source,java]
----
Button button = new Button("Navigate to company");
button.addClickListener(e ->
     button.getUI().ifPresent(ui ->
           ui.navigate("company"))
);
----

[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V23.2"]
=== Interacting directly with the target view

The [methodname]`navigate()` method where you give the target view class as a parameter returns the actual target view as [classname]`Optional`.
This allows you to further configure the new view with its Java API. 

The return value may be empty if the target view is not immediately available for some reason.
This may happen, for example, because of security constraints or if the navigation was canceled or postponed in a <<lifecycle#, navigation lifecycle events>>.

*Example*: Creating an edit button that navigates to a separate view and assigns the DTO to the target view with its native Java API:

[source,java]
----
new Button("Edit " + user.getName(), event -> {
    ui.navigate(UserEditor.class)
            .ifPresent(editor -> editor.editUser(user));
})
----

> Note that, with this code, Vaadin does not have the data to maintain a deep link to edit the very same user. 

Reviewer 3: > Vaadin does not have the data to maintain a deep link to edit the very same user

Do you mean that "Vaadin would not automatically update the URL to include information about the edited user"? 

Also, does this sentence presuppose that the target view accepts parameters? If so, then this should be stated.

In many use cases, this is fine, but if you expect to share links to the target view, the target view must maintain enough details in the URL and deserialize the parameters, as described in <<route-parameters#maintaining-route-parameters-without-navigation, Maintaining Route Parameters without Navigation>>, or use Route Parameters to pass the data.

> Note, in previous versions, a similar mechanism has been widely used, but the reference of the target view has been fetched using dependency injection, searched from the [classname]`UI` internals, or picked up using application-specific helpers.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure which previous versions are being referred to here. But in any case, is this information useful and actionable for our existing users? If so, then let's mention it in the upgrade guide and keep the main guides optimized for our new users. That is, I think this sentence should be removed from this guide.

----

Note that, with this code, Vaadin does not have the data to maintain a deep link to edit the very same user. 
In many use cases, this is fine, but if you expect to share links to the target view, the target view must maintain enough details in the URL and deserialize the parameters, as described in <<route-parameters#maintaining-route-parameters-without-navigation, Maintaining Route Parameters without Navigation>>, or use Route Parameters to pass the data.

Note, in previous versions, a similar mechanism has been widely used, but the reference of the target view has been fetched using dependency injection, searched from the [classname]`UI` internals, or picked up using application-specific helpers.

=== Passing Data using Route Parameters

> If your target view implements HasRouteParameters, you can submit trivial data to the target view as RouteParameters. Compared to directly interacting with the target views Java API, this method automatically maintains the URL for deep linking. However, you can't pass more complex objects as route parameters as such.

Reviewer 3: > automatically maintains the URL for deep linking

To my mind, the term "deep linking" is not widely used. I would just get rid of it wherever possible and explain it in plain English. Here for example I think it would be clearer to say something like: _Compared to directly interacting with the target views' Java API, this method automatically updates the URL to include the Route Parameter._

Reviewer 2: “Deep linking” is fairly common language in my opinion. For example, Apple is using that in their developer-focused communication.

Reviewer 3: Let's keep it then.
